As for possible next topics, looking at the project's work packages, some angles to explore
(by seeing what has happened in the literature in the past year or two) are (all targeting
the transportation domain):
Integration of real-time data, digital twin style. There is of course endless related work
on this, but there is a lot of freedom to hop on any promising development of the past 1-2
years, e.g., LLM-related ideas.
Dynamic resource allocation for simulation tasks, particularly simulation-based optimization
(where each run's cost is hard to predict, the number of replications at each parameter
combination depends affects the statistical significance, and the concrete task may have
very particular execution patterns, e.g., rounds of k concurrent runs in genetic
algorithm-based simulation optimization). When making use of heterogeneous hardware (say,
CPUs + GPUs) it becomes even more complicated. I've been planning to formulate the
underlying statistics + optimization problem for the simulation domain for many years, not
sure whether anyone has done it in the meantime.
Faster optimization across transportation simulations by:
The use of hardware accelerators (this might end up being GPUs, where we have a lot of prior
work, but as far as I know nothing exists that would be ready for practical use). Some kind
of co-location of the simulation state in VRAM in a way to facilitate machine learning tasks
could be explored.
Dynamic switching of abstraction levels (micro, meso, macro). This is a pretty old idea, but
there might be space for smart decision making to choose areas of interest at runtime based
on context information.
Differentiable simulation. There is a decent amount of prior work on AutoDiff-based
differentiable simulation for microscopic traffic simulation. What is probably underexplored
is the integration of such approaches with more complex models beyond car-following models +
some representation of traffic lights. Another angle is the use of the gradients not just for
optimization but directly in machine learning tasks, e.g., making use of the fact that the
simulation gradients can be evaluated directly instead of having to be estimated based on
black box samples of the simulation's output statistics.